Hi everyone. So by now you have probably heard of chatGPT. It has taken the world and AI community
by storm and it is a system that allows you to interact with an AI and give it text-based tasks.
So for example, we can ask chatGPT to write us a small haiku about how important it is that
people understand AI and then they can use it to improve the world and make it more prosperous.
So when we run this, AI knowledge brings prosperity for all to see embrace its power.
Okay, not bad. And so you could see that chatGPT went from left to right and generated all these
words sequentially. Now I asked it already the exact same prompt a little bit earlier and it
generated a slightly different outcome. AI's power to grow, ignorance holds us back, learn,
prosperity waits. So pretty good in both cases and slightly different. So you can see that chatGPT
is a probabilistic system and for anyone prompt it can give us multiple answers, sort of replying
to it. Now this is just one example of a prompt. People have come up with many, many examples
and there are entire websites that index interactions with chatGPT. And so many of them
are quite humorous. Explain HTML to me like I'm a dog. Write release notes for chess too.
Write a note about Elon Musk buying a Twitter and so on. So as an example, please write a breaking
news article about a leaf falling from a tree and a shocking turn of events. A leaf has fallen from
a tree in the local park. Witnesses report that the leaf, which was previously attached to a branch
of a tree, detached itself and fell to the ground. Very dramatic. So you can see that this is a pretty
remarkable system and it is what we call a language model because it models the sequence of words or
characters or tokens more generally and it knows how sort of words follow each other in English
language. And so from its perspective, what it is doing is it is completing the sequence. So I give
it the start of a sequence and it completes the sequence with the outcome. And so it's a language
model in that sense. Now I would like to focus on the under the hood of under the hood components of
what makes chatGPT work. So what is the neural network under the hood that models the sequence of
these words? And that comes from this paper called attention is all you need. In 2017, a landmark
paper, landmark paper in AI that produced and proposed the transformer architecture. So GPT
is short for generatively pre-trained transformer. So transformer is the neural net that actually
does all the heavy lifting under the hood. It comes from this paper in 2017. Now if you read this
paper, this reads like a pretty random machine translation paper. And that's because I think
the authors didn't fully anticipate the impact that the transformer would have on the field.
And this architecture that they produced in the context of machine translation,
in their case, actually ended up taking over the rest of AI in the next five years after. And so
this architecture with minor changes was copy pasted into a huge amount of applications in AI
in more recent years. And that includes at the core of chatGPT. Now we are not going to, what I'd
like to do now is I'd like to build out something like chatGPT. But we're not going to be able to,
of course, reproduce chatGPT. This is a very serious production grade system. It is trained on
a good chunk of internet. And then there's a lot of pre-training and fine tuning stages to it.
And so it's very complicated. What I'd like to focus on is just to train a transformer based
language model. And in our case, it's going to be a character level language model. I still think
that is a very educational with respect to how these systems work. So I don't want to train on
the chunk of internet. We need a smaller data set. In this case, I propose that we work with
my favorite toy data set. It's called Tiny Shakespeare. And what it is is basically it's
a concatenation of all of the works of Shakespeare in my understanding. And so this is all of Shakespeare
in a single file. This file is about one megabyte. And it's just all of Shakespeare.
And what we are going to do now is we're going to basically model how these characters
follow each other. So for example, given a chunk of these characters like this,
given some context of characters in the past, the transformer neural network will look at
the characters that I've highlighted and is going to predict that G is likely to come next in the
sequence. And it's going to do that because we're going to train that transformer on Shakespeare.
And it's just going to try to produce character sequences that look like this. And in that process
is going to model all the patterns inside this data. So once we've trained the system, I just
like to give you a preview, we can generate infinite Shakespeare. And of course, it's a fake
thing that looks kind of like Shakespeare. Apologies for there's some jank that I'm not able to resolve
in in here, but you can see how this is going character by character. And it's kind of like
predicting Shakespeare like language. So verily, my Lord, the sites have left the again, the king
coming with my curses with precious pale, and then traneosa something else, etc. And this is just
coming out of the transformer in a very similar manner as it would come out in chat GPT. In our
case character by character in chat GPT, it's coming out on the token by token level and tokens are
these sort of like little subword pieces. So they're not word level, they're kind of like work chunk
level. And now I've already written this entire code to train these transformers. And it is in
a GitHub repository that you can find. And it's called nano GPT. So nano GPT is a repository
that you can find on my GitHub. And it's a repository for training transformers on any given text.
And what I think is interesting about it, because there's many ways to train transformers,
but this is a very simple implementation. So it's just two files of 300 lines of code each,
one file defies the GPT model, the transformer, and one file trains it on some given text data set.
And here I'm showing that if you train it on a open web text data set, which is a fairly large
data set of web pages, then I reproduce the performance of GPT two. So GPT two is an early
version of OpenAI's GPT from 2017 if I recall correctly. And I've only so far reproduced the
smallest 124 million parameter model. But basically, this is just proving that the code base is
correctly arranged. And I'm able to load the neural network weights that OpenAI has released later.
So you can take a look at the finished code here in nano GPT. But what I would like to do in this
lecture is I would like to basically write this repository from scratch. So we're going to begin
with an empty file. And we're going to define a transformer piece by piece. We're going to train
it on the tiny Shakespeare data set. And we'll see how we can then generate infinite Shakespeare.
And of course, this can copy paste to any arbitrary text data set that you like. But my goal really
here is to just make you understand and appreciate how under the hood chat GPT works. And really,
all that's required is a proficiency in Python and some basic understanding of calculus and statistics.
And it would help if you also see my previous videos on the same YouTube channel, in particular,
my Make More series, where I define smaller and simpler neural network language models. So multi
parallel perceptrons and so on. It really introduces the language modeling framework. And then here
in this video, we're going to focus on the transformer neural network itself. Okay, so I created
a new Google collab Jupyter notebook here. And this will allow me to later easily share this
code that we're going to develop together with you so you can follow along. So this will be in a
video description later. Now, here, I've just done some preliminaries. I downloaded the data set,
the tiny Shakespeare data set at this URL. And you can see that it's about a one megabyte file.
Then here I opened the input at txt file and just reading all the text at a string.
And we see that we are working with one million characters roughly. And the first 1000 characters,
if we just print them out, are basically what you would expect. This is the first 1000 characters
of the tiny Shakespeare data set, roughly up to here. So so far so good. Next, we're going to take
this text. And the text is a sequence of characters in Python. So when I call the set constructor on
it, I'm just going to get the set of all the characters that occur in this text. And then I
call list on that to create a list of those characters instead of just a set so that I have
an ordering an arbitrary ordering. And then I sort that. So basically, we get just all the characters
that occur in the entire data set and they're sorted. Now the number of them is going to be our
vocabulary size. These are the possible elements of our sequences. And we see that when I print here
the characters, there's 65 of them in total. There's a space character, and then all kinds of
special characters. And then capitals and lowercase letters. So that's our vocabulary. And that's the
sort of like possible characters that the model can see or emit. Okay, so next we would like to
develop some strategy to tokenize the input text. Now, when people say tokenize, they mean convert
the raw text as a string to some sequence of integers according to some note, according to some
vocabulary of possible elements. So as an example, here, we are going to be building a character
level language model. So we're simply going to be translating individual characters into integers.
So let me show you a chunk of code that sort of does that for us. So we're building both the encoder
and the decoder. And let me just talk through what's happening here. When we encode an arbitrary
text, like Hi, there, we're going to receive a list of integers that represents that string. So for
example, 46 47, etc. And then we also have the reverse mapping. So we can take this list and
decode it to get back the exact same string. So it's really just like a translation to integers
and back for arbitrary string. And for us, it is done on a character level. Now the way this was
achieved is we just iterate over all the characters here, and create a lookup table from the character
to the integer and vice versa. And then to encode some string, we simply translate all the characters
individually. And to decode it back, we use the reverse mapping, go and coordinate all of it.
Now, this is only one of many possible encodings, or many possible sort of tokenizers, and it's a
very simple one. But there's many other schemas that people have come up with in practice. So for
example, Google uses sentence piece. So sentence piece will also encode text into integers, but
in a different schema, and using a different vocabulary. And sentence piece is a subword
sort of tokenizer. And what that means is that you're not encoding entire words, but you're not
also encoding individual characters. It's a subword unit level. And that's usually what's
adopted in practice. For example, also OpenAI has this library called tick token that uses a
bipair encoding tokenizer. And that's what GPT uses. And you can also just encode words into
like hell world into lists of integers. So as an example, I'm using the tick token library here.
I'm getting the encoding for GPT2, or that was used for GPT2.
Instead of just having 65 possible characters, or tokens, they have 50,000 tokens. And so when
they encode the exact same string, hi there, we only get a list of three integers. But those integers
are not between zero and 64. They are between zero and 50,256. So basically, you can trade off the
codebook size and the sequence lengths. So you can have very long sequences of integers with very
small vocabularies, or you can have short sequences of integers with very large vocabularies. And so
typically people use in practice these subword encodings. But I'd like to keep our tokenizer
very simple. So we're using character level tokenizer. And that means that we have very
small codebooks. We have very simple encode and decode functions. But we do get very long sequences
as a result. But that's the level at which we're going to stick with this lecture, because it's
the simplest thing. Okay, so now that we have an encoder and a decoder, effectively a tokenizer,
we can tokenize the entire training set of Shakespeare. So here's a chunk of code that
does that. And I'm going to start to use the PyTorch library, and specifically the Torch.tensor
from the PyTorch library. So we're going to take all of the text in tiny Shakespeare, encode it,
and then wrap it into a Torch.tensor to get the data tensor. So here's what the data tensor looks
like when I look at just the first 1000 characters, or the 1000 elements of it. So we see that we have
a massive sequence of integers. And this sequence of integers here is basically an identical
translation of the first 1000 characters here. So I believe, for example, that zero is a new line
character. And maybe one is a space, not 100% sure. But from now on, the entire data set of text is
rerepresented as just, it's just stretched out as a single very large sequence of integers. Let me
do one more thing before we move on here. I'd like to separate out our data set into a train and a
validation split. So in particular, we're going to take the first 90% of the data set and consider
that to be the training data for the transformer. And we're going to withhold the last 10% at the end
of it to be the validation data. And this will help us understand to what extent our model is
overfitting. So we're going to basically hide and keep the validation data on the side, because we
don't want just a perfect memorization of this exact Shakespeare, we want a neural network that
sort of creates Shakespeare like text. And so it should be fairly likely for it to produce
the actual like stowed away, true Shakespeare text. And so we're going to use this to get a sense of
the overfitting. Okay, so now we would like to start plugging these text sequences or integer
sequences into the transformer so that it can train and learn those patterns. Now, the important
thing to realize is we're never going to actually feed entire text into transformer all at once,
that would be computationally very expressive and prohibitive. So when we actually train a
transformer on a lot of these data sets, we only work with chunks of the data set. And when we train
the transformer, we basically sample random little chunks out of the training set and train on just
chunks at a time. And these chunks have basically some kind of a length, and some maximum length.
Now, the maximum length typically, at least in the code I usually write is called block size.
You can you can find it on the different names like context length or something like that.
Let's start with the block size of just eight. And let me look at the first train data characters,
the first block size plus one characters, I'll explain why plus one in a second.
So this is the first nine characters in the sequence in the training set. Now, what I'd like to point
out is that when you sample a chunk of data like this, so set if these nine characters out of the
training set, this actually has multiple examples packed into it. And that's because all of these
characters follow each other. And so what this thing is going to say when we plug it into a
transformer is we're going to actually simultaneously train it to make prediction at every one
of these positions. Now, in the in a chunk of nine characters, there's actually eight individual
examples packed in there. So there's the example that when 18, when in the context of 1847,
likely comes next. In the context of 1847, 56 comes next. In the context of 1847, 56, 57 can come
next, and so on. So that's the eight individual examples. Let me actually spell it out with code.
So here's a chunk of code to illustrate. X are the inputs to the transformer. It will just be
the first block size characters. Y will be the next block size characters. So it's offset by one.
And that's because why are the targets for each position in the input. And then here I'm iterating
over all the block size of eight. And the context is always all the characters in X up to T and
including T. And the target is always the teeth character, but in the targets array Y. So let me
just run this. And basically, it spells out what I said in words. These are the eight examples
hidden in a chunk of nine characters that we sampled from the training set. I want to mention
one more thing. We train on all the eight examples here with context between one all the way up to
context of block size. And we train on that not just for computational reasons, because we happen
to have the sequence already or something like that. It's not just done for efficiency. It's also
done to make the transformer network be used to seeing contexts all the way from as little as one,
all the way to block size. And we'd like the transformer to be used to seeing everything
in between. And that's going to be useful later during inference, because while we're sampling,
we can start to set a sampling generation with as little as one character of context.
And then transformer knows how to predict next character with all the way up to just context
of one. And so then it can predict everything up to block size. And after block size, we have to
start truncating, because the transformer will never receive more than block size inputs when
it's predicting the next character. Okay, so we've looked at the time dimension of the tensors
that are going to be feeding into the transformer. There's one more dimension to care about, and that
is the batch dimension. And so as we're sampling these chunks of text, we're going to be actually,
every time we're going to feed them into a transformer, we're going to have many batches
of multiple chunks of text that are all stacked up in a single tensor. And that's just done for
efficiency, just so that we can keep the GPUs busy, because they are very good at parallel processing
of data. And so we just want to process multiple chunks all at the same time. But those chunks
are processed completely independently, they don't talk to each other, and so on. So let me
basically just generalize this and introduce a batch dimension. Here's a chunk of code.
Let me just run it, and then I'm going to explain what it does.
So here, because we're going to start sampling random locations in the data sets to pull chunks
from, I am setting the seed so that in the random number generator, so that the numbers I see here
are going to be the same numbers you see later, if you try to reproduce this. Now the batch size
here is how many independent sequences we are processing every forward backward pass of the
transformer. The block size, as I explained, is the maximum context length to make those predictions.
So let's say size four, block size eight, and then here's how we get batch for any arbitrary
split. If the split is a training split, then we're going to look at train data, otherwise at val
data, that gives us the data array. And then when I generate random positions to grab a chunk out of,
I actually grab, I actually generate batch size number of random offsets. So because this is four,
we are, ix is going to be a four numbers that are randomly generated between zero and length of data
minus block size. So it's just random offsets into the training set. And then x is, as I explained,
are the first block size characters starting at i. The y's are the offset by one of that,
so just add plus one. And then we're going to get those chunks for every one of integers i in ix,
and use a torch.stack to take all those one dimensional tensors as we saw here. And we're
going to stack them up as rows. And so they all become a row in a four by eight tensor. So here's
where I'm printing them. When I sample a batch xb and yb, the inputs, the transformer now are,
the input x is the four by eight tensor, four rows of eight columns. And each one of these is a
chunk of the training set. And then the targets here are in the associated array y, and they will
come in to the transformer all the way at the end to create the loss function. So they will give us
the correct answer for every single position inside x. And then these are the four independent rows.
So spelled out as we did before, this four by eight array contains a total of 32 examples,
and they're completely independent as far as the transformer is concerned. So when the input is
24, the target is 43, or rather 43 here in the y array. When the input is 24, 43, the target is 58.
When the input is 24, 43, 58, the target is five, etc. Or like when it is 52, 58, 1, the target is 58.
Right, so you can sort of see this spelled out. These are the 32 independent examples packed in
to a single batch of the input x, and then the desired targets are in y. And so now this
integer tensor of x is going to feed into the transformer. And that transformer is going to
simultaneously process all these examples and then look up the correct integers to predict in every
one of these positions in the tensor y. Okay, so now that we have our batch of input that we'd like
to feed into a transformer, let's start basically feeding this into neural networks. Now we're
going to start off with the simplest possible neural network, which in this case is the
simplest possible neural network, which in the case of language modeling, in my opinion, is the
bi-gram language model. And we've covered the bi-gram language model in my Make More series in a lot
of depth. And so here I'm going to sort of go faster and let's just implement the PyTorch module
directly that implements the bi-gram language model. So I'm importing the PyTorch nn module
for reproducibility. And then here I'm constructing a bi-gram language model, which is a subclass of
the input and then I'm calling it and I'm passing in the inputs and the targets. And I'm just printing.
Now when the inputs and targets come here, you see that I'm just taking the index, the inputs
x here, which I renamed to idx. And I'm just passing them into this token embedding table.
So what's going on here is that here in the constructor, we are creating a token embedding
table and it is of size vocab size by vocab size. And we're using an end-end embedding,
which is a very thin wrapper around basically a tensor of shape vocab size by vocab size.
And what's happening here is that when we pass idx here, every single integer in our input
is going to refer to this embedding table and is going to pluck out a row of that embedding table
corresponding to its index. So 24 here will go to the embedding table and will pluck out the 24
row. And then 43 will go here and pluck out the 43rd row, etc. And then PyTorch is going to arrange
all of this into a batch by time by channel tensor. In this case, batch is 4, time is 8, and C, which is
the channels is vocab size or 65. And so we're just going to pluck out all those rows, arrange them
in a b by t by c. And now we're going to interpret this as the logits, which are basically the scores
for the next character in a sequence. And so what's happening here is we are predicting what comes
next based on just the individual identity of a single token. And you can do that because,
I mean, currently the tokens are not talking to each other, and they're not seeing any context,
except for they're just seeing themselves. So I'm a token number five. And then I can actually
make pretty decent predictions about what comes next, just by knowing that I'm token five, because
some characters follow other characters in technical scenarios. So we saw a lot of this in a lot more
depth in the Make More series. And here, if I just run this, then we currently get the predictions,
the scores, the logits for every one of the four by eight positions. Now that we've made predictions
about what comes next, we'd like to evaluate the loss function. And so in Make More series, we saw
that a good way to measure a loss or like a quality of the predictions is to use the negative log
likelihood loss, which is also implemented in PyTorch under the name cross entropy. So what we'd
like to do here is loss is the cross entropy on the predictions and the targets. And so this
measures the quality of the logits with respect to the targets. In other words, we have the identity
of the next character. So how well are we predicting the next character based on the logits? And
intuitively, the correct dimension of logits, depending on whatever the target is, should have
a very high number. And all the other dimensions should be very low number. Now the issue is that
this won't actually, this is what we want. We want to basically output the logits and the loss.
This is what we want, but unfortunately, this won't actually run. We get an error message.
But intuitively, we want to measure this. Now when we go to the PyTorch cross entropy
documentation here, we're trying to call the cross entropy in its functional form. So that
means we don't have to create like a module for it. But here when we go to the documentation,
you have to look into the details of how PyTorch expects these inputs. And basically the issue
here is PyTorch expects, if you have multi dimensional input, which we do, because we have a
B by T by C tensor, then it actually really wants the channels to be the second dimension here.
So basically, it wants a B by C by T instead of a B by T by C. And so it's just the details of how
PyTorch treats these kinds of inputs. And so we don't actually want to deal with that. So what
we're going to do instead is we need to basically reshape our logits. So here's what I like to do.
I like to take basically give names to the dimensions. So logits.shape is B by T by C and
unpack those numbers. And then let's say that logits equals logits.view. And we want it to be a B
times T by C. So just a two dimensional array. Right. So we're going to take all the, we're going
to take all of these positions here, and we're going to stretch them out in a one dimensional
sequence and preserve the channel dimension as the second dimension. So we're just kind of
like stretching out the array. So it's two dimensional. And in that case, it's going to
better conform to what PyTorch sort of expects in its dimensions. Now we have to do the same to
targets, because currently targets are of shape B by T. And we want it to be just B times T.
So one dimensional. Now, alternatively, you could always still just do minus one, because PyTorch
will guess what this should be if you want to lay it out. But let me just be explicit and say
view times T. Once we've reshaped this, it will match the cross entropy case. And then we should
be able to evaluate our loss. Okay, so that right now, and we can do loss. And so currently we see
that the loss is 4.87. Now, because we have 65 possible vocabulary elements, we can actually
guess at what the loss should be. And in particular, we covered negative log likelihood in a lot of
detail, we are expecting log or ln of one over 65 and negative of that. So we're expecting the
loss to be about 4.17, but we're getting 4.87. And so that's telling us that the initial prediction
is are not super diffuse, they've got a little bit of entropy. And so we're guessing wrong.
So yes, but actually we are able to evaluate the loss. Okay, so now that we can evaluate the quality
of the model on some data, we'd like to also be able to generate from the model. So let's do the
generation. Now I'm going to go again a little bit faster here because I covered all this already
in the previous videos. So here's a generate function for the model. So we take some, we take
the same kind of input IDX here. And basically, this is the current context of some characters
in a batch, in some batch. So it's also b by t. And the job of generate is to basically take this
b by t and extend it to be b by t plus one plus two plus three. And so it's just basically it
continues the generation in all the batch dimensions in the time dimension. So that's its job. And we'll
do that for max new tokens. So you can see here on the bottom, there's going to be some stuff here.
But on the bottom, whatever is predicted is concatenated on top of the previous IDX
along the first dimension, which is the time dimension to create a b by t plus one.
So that becomes a new IDX. So the job of generate is to take a b by t and make it a b by t plus
one plus two plus three, as many as we want max new tokens. So this is the generation from the
model. Now inside the generation, what are we doing? We're taking the current indices,
we're getting the predictions. So we get those are in the logits. And then the loss here is going
to be ignored because we're not we're not using that. And we have no targets that are sort of
ground truth targets that we're going to be comparing with. Then once we get the logits,
we are only focusing on the last step. So instead of a b by t by C, we're going to pluck out the
negative one, the last element in the time dimension, because those are the predictions for
what comes next. So that gives us the logits, which we then cover to probabilities via softmax.
And then we use torsion multinomial to sample from those probabilities. And we ask PyTorch to give
us one sample. And so IDX next will become a b by one, because each one of the batch dimensions,
we're going to have a single prediction for what comes next. So this num samples equals one,
will make this be a one. And then we're going to take those integers that come from the sampling
process, according to the probability distribution given here. And those integers got just concatenated
on top of the current sort of like running stream of integers. And this gives us a b by t plus one.
And then we can return that. Now, one thing here is, you see how I'm calling self of IDX,
which will end up going to the forward function. I'm not providing any targets. So currently,
this would give an error because targets is sort of like not given. So targets has to be optional.
So targets is none by default. And then if targets is none, then there's no loss to create. So it's
just losses none. But else, all of this happens and we can create a loss. So this will make it so
if we have the targets, we provide them and get a loss. If we have no targets,
it will just get the logits. So this here will generate from the model.
And let's take that for a ride now. So I have another code chunk here, which will generate for
the model from the model. And okay, this is kind of crazy. So maybe let me let me break this down.
So these are the IDX, right? I'm creating a batch will be just one time will be just one.
So I'm creating a little one by one tensor, and it's holding a zero. And the d type, the data type
is integer. So zero is going to be how we kick off the generation. And remember that zero is
the element standing for a new line character. So it's kind of like a reasonable thing to feed in
as the very first character in a sequence to be the new line. So it's going to be IDX,
which we're going to feed in here. Then we're going to ask for 100 tokens. And then end that
generate will continue that. Now, because generate works on the level of batches, we then have to
index into the zero throw to basically unplug the single batch dimension that exists. And then
that gives us a time steps, just a one dimensional array of all the indices,
which we will convert to simple Python list from pytorch tensor, so that that can feed into our
decode function and convert those integers into text. So let me bring this back. And we're generating
100 tokens, let's run. And here's the generation that we achieved. So obviously, as garbage,
and the reason it's garbage is because this is totally random model. So next up, we're going to
want to train this model. Now, one more thing I wanted to point out here is this function is
written to be general. But it's kind of like ridiculous right now, because we're feeding in
all this, we're building out this context, and we're concatenating it all, and we're always feeding it
all into the model. But that's kind of ridiculous, because this is just a simple by Graham model.
So to make, for example, this prediction about K, we only needed this w. But actually, what we
fed into the model is we fed the entire sequence. And then we only looked at the very last piece,
and predicted K. So the only reason I'm writing it in this way is because right now this is a
by Graham model, but I'd like to keep this function fixed. And I'd like it to work later when our
characters actually basically look further in the history. And so right now the history is not
used. So this looks silly. But eventually the history will be used. And so that's why we want to
do it this way. So just a quick comment on that. So now we see that this is random. So let's train
the model. So it becomes a bit less random. Okay, let's now train the model. So first, what I'm going
to do is I'm going to create a pytorch optimization object. So here we are using the optimizer,
Adam w. Now in a make more series, we've only ever used the casting gradient descent, the simplest
possible optimizer, which you can get using the SGD instead. But I want to use Adam, which is a much
more advanced and popular optimizer. And it works extremely well for typical good setting for the
learning rate is roughly three negative four. But for very, very small networks, like is the case
here, you can get away with much, much higher learning rates, one negative three or even higher
probably. But let me create the optimizer object, which will basically take the gradients and update
the parameters using the gradients. And then here, our batch size above was only four. So let me
actually use something bigger, let's say 32. And then for some number of steps, we are sampling a
new batch of data, we're evaluating the loss, we're zeroing out all the gradients from the previous
step, getting the gradients for all the parameters, and then using those gradients to update our
parameters. So typical training loop, as we saw in the make more series. So let me now run this
for say 100 iterations. And let's see what kind of losses we're going to get.
So we started around 4.7. And now we're going to down to like 4.6, 4.5, etc. So the optimization is
definitely happening. But let's sort of try to increase number of iterations and only print at
the end. Because we probably will not train for longer. Okay, so we're down to 3.6, roughly.
Okay, so we're down to 3.6, roughly. Roughly down to three.
This is the most janky optimization.
Okay, it's working. Let's just do 10,000. And then from here, we want to copy this.
And hopefully, we're going to get something reasonable. And of course, it's not going to be
Shakespeare from by-gram model. But at least we see that the loss is improving. And hopefully,
we're expecting something a bit more reasonable. Okay, so we're down at about 2.5 ish. Let's see
what we get. Okay, dramatic improvement, certainly on what we had here. So let me just increase the
number of tokens. Okay, so we see that we're starting to get something at least like reasonable ish.
Certainly not Shakespeare. But the model is making progress. So that is the simplest possible model.
So now what I'd like to do is, obviously, that this is a very simple model because the tokens
are not talking to each other. So given the previous context of whatever was generated,
we're only looking at the very last character to make the predictions about what's next.
So now these tokens have to start talking to each other and figuring out what is in the context
so that they can make better predictions for what comes next. And this is how we're going to kick
off the transformer. Okay, so next, I took the code that we developed in this Jupyter Notebook
and I converted it to be a script. And I'm doing this because I just want to simplify our intermediate
work, which is just the final product that we have at this point. So in the top here, I put all
the hyperparameters that we find. I introduced a few and I'm going to speak to that in a little bit.
Otherwise, a lot of this should be recognizable. Reproducibility, read data, get the encoder and
the decoder, create the train into splits. I use the kind of like data loader that gets a batch
of the inputs and targets. This is new and I'll talk about it in a second. Now this is the
biogram language model that we developed. And it can forward and give us a logits and loss and it
can generate. And then here we are creating the optimizer and this is the training loop.
So everything here should look pretty familiar. Now some of the small things that I added,
number one, I added the ability to run on a GPU if you have it. So if you have a GPU, then you can
this will use CUDA instead of just CPU and everything will be a lot more faster. Now when
device becomes CUDA, then we need to make sure that when we load the data, we move it to device.
When we create the model, we want to move the model parameters to device. So as an example,
here we have the in an embedding table and it's got a dot weight inside it, which stores the
sort of lookup table. So that would be moved to the GPU so that all the calculations here
happen on the GPU and they can be a lot faster. And then finally here when I'm creating the context
that feeds into generate, I have to make sure that I create on the device. Number two, what I
introduced is the fact that here in the training loop, here I was just printing the loss dot item
inside the training loop. But this is a very noisy measurement of the current loss because every
batch will be more or less lucky. And so what I want to do usually is I have an estimate loss
function and the estimate loss basically then goes up here and it averages up the loss over
multiple batches. So in particular, we're going to iterate eval-idder times and we're going to
basically get our loss and then we're going to get the average loss for both splits. And so this
will be a lot less noisy. So here when we call the estimate loss, we're going to report the
pretty accurate train and validation loss. Now when we come back up, you'll notice a few things
here. I'm setting the model to evaluation phase and down here I'm resetting it back to training
phase. Now right now for our model as is, this doesn't actually do anything because the only thing
inside this model is this nm.embedding and this network would behave both, would behave the same
in both evaluation mode and training mode. We have no dropout layers, we have no bathroom layers,
etc. But it is a good practice to think through what mode your neural network is in because some
layers will have different behavior at inference time or training time. And there's also this
context manager torched up no grad and this is just telling PyTorch that everything that happens
inside this function, we will not call dot backward all. And so PyTorch can be a lot more
efficient with its memory use because it doesn't have to store all the intermediate variables
because we're never going to call backward. And so it can be a lot more memory efficient in that
way. So also a good practice to tell PyTorch when we don't intend to do back propagation.
So right now this script is about 120 lines of code off and that's kind of our starter code.
I'm calling it by gram dot pi and I'm going to release it later. Now running this script
gives us output in the terminal and it looks something like this. It basically, as I ran this
code, it was giving me the train loss and val loss and we see that we convert to somewhere around 2.5
with the PyGram model. And then here's the sample that we produced at the end.
And so we have everything packaged up in the script and we're in a good position now to iterate
on this. Okay, so we are almost ready to start writing our very first self attention block for
processing these tokens. Now, before we actually get there, I want to get you used to a mathematical
trick that is used in the self attention inside a transformer and it's really just like at the
heart of an efficient implementation of self attention. And so I want to work with this toy
example to just get you used to this operation and then it's going to make it much more clear
once we actually get to it in the script again. So let's create a b by t by c where b, t and c are
just four, eight and two in this toy example. And these are basically channels and we have batches
and we have the time component and we have some information at each point in the sequence. So c.
Now what we would like to do is we would like these tokens. So we have up to eight tokens here
in a batch and these eight tokens are currently not talking to each other and we would like them to
talk to each other. We'd like to couple them. And in particular, we don't we we want to couple them
in a very specific way. So the token for example at the fifth location, it should not communicate
with tokens in the sixth, seventh and eighth location, because those are future tokens in the
sequence. The token on the fifth location should only talk to the one in the fourth, third, second
and first. So it's only so information only flows from previous context to the current time step.
And we cannot get any information from the future because we are about to try to predict the future.
So what is the easiest way for tokens to communicate? Okay, the easiest way I would say
is okay, if we are up to if we're a fifth token, and I'd like to communicate with my past,
the simplest way we can do that is to just do a weight is to just do an average of all the
of all the preceding elements. So for example, if I'm the fifth token, I would like to take the
channels that make up that that are information at my step. But then also the channels from the
fourth step, third step, second step in the first step, I'd like to average those up. And then that
would become sort of like a feature vector that summarizes me in the context of my history.
Now, of course, just doing a sum or like an average is an extremely weak form of interaction,
like this communication is extremely lossy. We've lost a ton of information about spatial
arrangements of all those tokens. But that's okay for now, we'll see how we can bring that
information back later. For now, what we would like to do is for every single batch element
independently, for every teeth token in that sequence, we'd like to now calculate the average
of all the vectors in all the previous tokens and also at this token. So let's write that out. I have
a small snippet here. And instead of just fumbling around, let me just copy paste it and talk to it.
So in other words, we're going to create X and BOW is short for bag of words, because bag of words
is is kind of like a term that people use when you are just averaging up things. So this is just a
bag of words. Basically, there's a word stored on every one of these eight locations, and we're
doing a bag of words, just averaging. So in the beginning, we're going to say that it's just
initialized at zero. And then I'm doing a for loop here. So we're not being efficient yet,
that's coming. But for now, we're just iterating over all the batch dimensions independently,
iterating over time. And then the previous tokens are at this batch dimension, and then
everything up to and including the teeth token. Okay. So when we slice out X in this way, X-prev
becomes of shape. How many T elements that were in the past. And then of course, C. So all the
two dimensional information from these little tokens. So that's the previous sort of chunk of
tokens from my current sequence. And then I'm just doing the average or the mean over the
zero dimension. So I'm averaging out the time here. And I'm just going to get a little C one
dimensional vector, which I'm going to store in X back of words. So I can run this. And this is not
going to be very informative because let's see. So this is X of zero. So this is the zero batch
element. And then X bow at zero. Now, you see how the at the first location here, you see that the
two are equal. And that's because it's, we're just doing an average of this one token. But here,
this one is now an average of these two. And now this one is an average of these three. And so on.
So, and this last one is the average of all of these elements. So vertical average, just averaging
up all the tokens now gives this outcome here. So this is all well and good. But this is very
inefficient. Now the trick is that we can be very, very efficient about doing this using matrix
multiplication. So that's the mathematical trick. And let me show you what I mean. Let's work with
the toy example here. Let me run it and I'll explain. I have a simple matrix here that is a three by
three of all ones, a matrix B of just random numbers, and it's a three by two, and a matrix C,
which will be three by three, multiply three by two, which will give out a three by two. So here,
we're just using matrix multiplication. So a multiply B gives us C. Okay, so how are these numbers
in C achieved, right? So this number in the top left is the first row of A, dot product,
with the first column of B. And since all the row of A right now is all just once,
then the dot product here with with this column of B is just going to do a sum of these,
of this column. So two plus six plus six is 14. The element here in the output of C is also the
first column here, the first row of A multiplied now with the second column of B. So seven plus four
plus five is 16. Now you see that there's repeating elements here. So this 14 again is because this
row is again all once and it's multiplying the first column of B. So we get 14. And this one is
this and so on. So this last number here is the last row dot product last column. Now the trick
here is the following. This is just a boring number of, it's just a boring array of all once,
but torches this function called trill, which is short for a triangular, something like that.
And you can wrap it in torche dot once and we'll just return the lower triangular portion
of this. Okay. So now it will basically zero out these guys here. So we just get the lower
triangular part. Well, what happens if we do that?
So now we'll have A like this and B like this. And now what are we getting here and C?
Well, what is this number? Well, this is the first row times the first column. And because this is
zeros, these elements here are now ignored. So we just get a two. And then this number here is the
first row times the second column. And because these are zeros, they get ignored. And it's just
seven. The seven multiplies this one. But look what happened here because this is one and then zeros,
we, what ended up happening is we're just plucking out the row of this row of B. And that's what we
got. Now here, we have one, one, zero. So here, one, one, zero dot product with these two columns
will now give us two plus six, which is eight and seven plus four, which is 11. And because this is
one, one, one, we ended up with the addition of all of them. And so basically, depending on how
many ones and zeros we have here, we are basically doing a sum currently of the variable number of
these rows. And that gets deposited into C. So currently, we're doing sums because these are
ones, but we can also do average, right? And you can start to see how we could do average of the rows
of B, sort of in incremental fashion, because we don't have to, we can basically normalize these
rows so that they sum to one, and then we're going to get an average. So if we took a, and then we
did a equals a divide a torch dot sum in the of a in the one dimension. And then let's keep them
is true. So therefore, the broadcasting will work out. So if I rerun this, you see now that these
rows now sum to one. So this row is one, this was point point five point five zero. And here we get
one thirds. And now when we do a multiply B, what are we getting? Here we are just getting the first
row, first row. Here now we are getting the average of the first two rows. Okay, so two and six
average is four, and four and seven averages five point five. And on the bottom here, we're now getting
the average of these three rows. So the average of all of elements of B are now deposited here.
And so you can see that by manipulating these elements of this multiplying matrix, and then
multiplying it with any given matrix, we can do these averages in this incremental fashion, because
we just get and we can manipulate that based on the elements of a. Okay, so that's very convenient.
So let's swing back up here and see how we can vectorize this and make it much more efficient
using what we've learned. So in particular, we are going to produce an array a, but here I'm going
to call it way short for weights. But this is our a. And this is how much of every row we want to
average up. And it's going to be an average because you can see that these rows sum to one.
So this is our a, and then our B in this example, of course, is x. So it's going to happen here now
is that we are going to have an expo two. And this expo two is going to be way multiplying
rx. So let's think this through way is t by t. And this is matrix multiplying in pytorch,
a B by t by C. And it's giving us what shape. So pytorch will come here and it will see that
these shapes are not the same. So it will create a batch dimension here. And this is a batch matrix
multiply. And so it will apply this matrix multiplication in all the batch elements in
parallel and individually. And then for each batch element, there will be a t by t multiplying t by
C, exactly as we had below. So this will now create B by t by C. And expo two will now become
identical to expo. So we can see that torch dot all close of expo and expo two should be true.
Now, so this kind of like convinces us that these are in fact the same. So expo and expo two, if I
just print them. Okay, we're not going to be able to, okay, we're not going to be able to just stare
it down. But let me try expo basically just at the zeroth element and expo two at the zeroth element.
So just the first batch. And we should see that this and that should be identical, which they are.
Right. So what happened here, the trick is, we were able to use batch matrix multiply
to do this aggregation, really. And it's a weighted aggregation. And the weights are specified in this
t by t array. And we're basically doing weighted sums. And these weighted sums are according to
the weights inside here that take on sort of this triangular form. And so that means that a token at
the t dimension will only get sort of information from the tokens preceding it. So that's exactly
what we want. And finally, I would like to rewrite it in one more way. And we're going to see why
that's useful. So this is the third version. And it's also identical to the first and second.
But let me talk through it. It uses softmax. So trill here is this matrix, lower triangular ones.
Way begins as all zero. Okay, so if I just print way in the beginning, it's all zero.
Then I use masked fill. So what this is doing is way that masked fill, it's all zeros. And I'm
saying, for all the elements where trill is equals equals zero, make them be negative infinity.
So all the elements where trill is zero will become negative infinity now. So this is what we get.
And then the final one here is softmax. So if I take a softmax along every single, so dim is
negative one, so along every single row, if I do a softmax, what is that going to do?
Well, softmax is also like a normalization operation, right? And so spoiler alert,
you get the exact same matrix. Let me bring back the softmax. And recall that in softmax,
we're going to exponentiate every single one of these. And then we're going to divide by the sum.
And so if we exponentiate every single element here, we're going to get a one. And here we're
going to get basically zero, zero, zero, zero, everywhere else. And then when we normalize,
we just get one. Here we're going to get one, one, and then zeros. And then softmax will,
again, divide, and this will give us point five point five and so on. And so this is also the
same way to produce this mask. Now the reason that this is a bit more interesting, and the reason
we're going to end up using it in self attention is that these weights here begin with zero. And
you can think of this as like an interaction strength or like an affinity. So basically,
it's telling us how much of each token from the past do we want to aggregate an average up.
And then this line is saying tokens from the past cannot communicate by setting them to
negative infinity. We're saying that we will not aggregate anything from those tokens.
And so basically, this then goes through softmax and through the weighted, and this is the aggregation
through matrix multiplication. And so what this is now is you can think of these as these zeros
are currently just set by us to be zero. But a quick preview is that these affinities between
the tokens are not going to be just constant at zero, they're going to be data dependent.
These tokens are going to start looking at each other. And some tokens will find other tokens
more or less interesting. And depending on what their values are, they're going to find each other
interesting to different amounts. And I'm going to call those affinities, I think. And then here we
are saying the future cannot communicate with the past, we're going to clamp them. And then when we
normalize and some we're going to aggregate sort of their values, depending on how interesting
they find each other. And so that's the preview for self attention. And basically, long story short
from this entire section is that you can do weighted aggregations of your past elements
by having by using matrix multiplication of a lower triangular fashion. And then the elements
here in the lower triangular part are telling you how much of each element fuses into this position.
So we're going to use this trick now to develop the self attention block. So first,
let's get some quick preliminaries out of the way. First, the thing I'm kind of bothered by is that
you see how we're passing in vocab size into the constructor. There's no need to do that because
vocab size is already defined up top as a global variable. So there's no need to pass this stuff
around. Next, what I want to do is I don't want to actually create, I want to create like a level
of indirection here, where we don't directly go to the embedding for the logits. But instead,
but instead we go through this intermediate phase because we're going to start making that bigger.
So let me introduce a new variable n embed. It's short for number of embedding dimensions.
So n embed here will be say 32. That was the suggestion from GitHub co-piled, by the way.
It also suggested 32, which is a good number. So this is an embedding table and only 32 dimensional
embeddings. So then here, this is not going to give us logits directly. Instead, this is going to
give us token embeddings. That's what I'm going to call it. And then to go from the token embeddings
to the logits, we're going to need a linear layer. So self.lmhead, let's call it short for
language modeling head, is nn linear from n embed up to vocab size. And then when we swing over here,
we're actually going to get the logits by exactly what the co-pilot says. Now we have to be careful
here because this C and this C are not equal. This is n embed C and this is vocab size.
So let's just say that n embed is equal to C. And then this just creates one spurious layer of
interaction through a linear layer. But this should basically run. So we see that this runs
and this currently looks kind of spurious, but we're going to build on top of this.
Now next up, so far we've taken these indices and we've encoded them based on the identity of the
tokens inside IDX. The next thing that people very often do is that we're not just encoding the
identity of these tokens, but also their position. So we're going to have a second position
embedding table here. So salt that position embedding table is an embedding of block size by n embed.
And so each position from zero to block size minus one will also get its own embedding vector.
And then here, first let me decode b by t from IDX.shape. And then here we're also going to have a
pause embedding, which is the positional embedding. And these are this is tordash arrange. So this will
be basically just integers from zero to t minus one. And all of those integers from zero to t
minus one get embedded through the table to create a t by c. And then here this gets renamed to just
say x and x will be the addition of the token embeddings with the positional embeddings.
And here the broadcasting note will work out. So b by t by c plus t by c, this gets right aligned
in new dimension of one gets added and it gets broadcasted across batch. So at this point x holds
not just the token identities, but the positions at which these tokens occur. And this is currently
not that useful because of course we just have a simple by-grain model. So it doesn't matter if
you're in the fifth position, the second position or wherever, it's all translation invariant at this
stage. So this information currently wouldn't help. But as we work on the self-attention block,
we'll see that this starts to matter. Okay, so now we get the crux of self-attention. So this is
probably the most important part of this video to understand. We're going to implement a small
self-attention for a single individual head as they're called. So we start off with where we were.
So all of this code is familiar. So right now I'm working with an example where I change the number
of channels from 2 to 32. So we have a 4 by 8 arrangement of tokens and the information
of each token is currently 32 dimensional, but we just are working with random numbers.
Now we saw here that the code as we had it before does a simple weight, simple average
of all the past tokens and the current token. So it's just the previous information and the
current information is just being mixed together in an average. And that's what this code currently
achieves. And it does so by creating this lower triangular structure, which allows us to mask out
this weight matrix that we create. So we mask it out and then we normalize it. And currently,
when we initialize the affinities between all the different sort of tokens or nodes, I'm going to
use those terms interchangeably. So when we initialize the affinities between all the different
tokens to be zero, then we see that way gives us this structure where every single row has these
uniform numbers. And so that's what that's what then in this matrix multiply makes it so that
we're doing a simple average. Now, we don't actually want this to be all uniform, because
different tokens will find different other tokens more or less interesting, and we want that to be
data dependent. So for example, if I'm a vowel, then maybe I'm looking for consonants in my past,
and maybe I want to know what those consonants are, and I want that information to flow to me.
And so I want to now gather information from the past, but I want to do it in a data dependent way.
And this is the problem that self attention solves. Now the way self attention solves this
is the following. Every single node or every single token at each position will emit two vectors.
It will emit a query, and it will emit a key. Now the query vector roughly speaking is what am I
looking for? And the key vector roughly speaking is what do I contain? And then the way we get
affinities between these tokens now in a sequence is we basically just do a dot product between the
keys and the queries. So my query dot products with all the keys of all the other tokens, and
that dot product now becomes way. And so if the key and the query are sort of aligned, they will
interact to a very high amount, and then I will get to learn more about that specific token, as
opposed to any other token in the sequence. So let's implement this now. We're going to implement
a single what's called head of self attention. So this is just one head. There's a hyper parameter
involved with these heads, which is the head size. And then here I'm initializing linear modules,
and I'm using biosecuals false. So these are just going to apply a matrix multiply with some fixed
weights. And now let me produce a key and q, k and q by forwarding these modules on x. So the
size of this will now become b by t by 16, because that is the head size. And the same here b by t by 16.
So this being that size. So you see here that when I forward this linear on top of my x,
all the tokens in all the positions in the b by t arrangement, all of them in parallel and
independently produce a key and a query. So no communication has happened yet. But the communication
comes now, all the queries will dot product with all the keys. So basically what we want is we want
way now, or the affinities between these to be query multiplying key. But we have to be careful
with we can't make this multiply this we actually need to transpose k. But we have to be also careful
because these are when you have the batch dimension. So in particular, we want to transpose the last
two dimensions, dimension negative one and dimension negative two. So negative two, negative one.
And so this matrix multiply now will basically do the following b by t by 16.
Matrix multiplies b by 16 by t to give us b by t by t.
Right. So for every row of B, we're now going to have a t square matrix giving us the affinities.
And these are now the way. So they're not zeros. They are now coming from this dot product between
the keys and the queries. So this can now run, I can run this. And the weighted aggregation now
is a function in a data band and manner between the keys and queries of these nodes.
So just inspecting what happened here. The way takes on this form. And you see that before way was
just a constant. So it was applied in the same way to all the batch elements. But now every
single batch elements will have different sort of way because every single batch element contains
different tokens at different positions. And so this is not data dependent. So when we look at
just the zero row, for example, in the input, these are the weights that came out. And so you can
see now that they're not just exactly uniform. And in particular, as an example here for the last row,
this was the eighth token. And the eighth token knows what content it has. And it knows at what
position it's in. And now the eighth token based on that creates a query. Hey, I'm looking for this
kind of stuff. I'm a vowel, I'm on the eighth position, I'm looking for any consonants at
positions up to four. And then all the nodes get to emit keys. And maybe one of the channels could be
I am a consonant and I am in a position up to four. And that key would have a high number in
that specific channel. And that's how the query and the key when they dot product, they can find
each other and create a high affinity. And when they have a high affinity, like say, this token
was pretty interesting to to this eighth token. When they have a high affinity, then through the
softmax, I will end up aggregating a lot of its information into my position. And so I'll get to
learn a lot about it. Now, just this we're looking at way after this has already happened.
Let me erase this operation as well. So let me erase the masking and the softmax, just to show you
the under the hood internals and how that works. So without the masking and the softmax way comes
out like this, right? This is the outputs of the top products. And these are the raw outputs, and
they take on values from negative, you know, two to positive two, etc. So that's the raw
interactions and raw affinities between all the nodes. But now, if I'm a fifth node, I will not
want to aggregate anything from the sixth node, seventh node, and the eighth node. So actually,
we use the upper triangular masking. So those are not allowed to communicate.
And now, we actually want to have a nice distribution. So we don't want to aggregate negative
point one one of this node. That's crazy. So instead, we exponentiate and normalize. And now
we get a nice distribution that sums to one. And this is telling us now in the data dependent
manner, how much of information to aggregate from any of these tokens in the past.
So that's way. And it's not zeros anymore. But it's calculated in this way. Now, there's one more
part to a single self attention head. And that is that when we do the aggregation, we don't
actually aggregate the tokens exactly. We aggregate, we produce one more value here. And we call that
the value. So in the same way that we produced key inquiry, we're also going to create a value.
And then here, we don't aggregate x, we calculate a V, which is just achieved by propagating this
linear on top of x again. And then we output way multiplied by V. So V is the elements that we
aggregate or the vectors that we aggregate instead of the raw x. And now, of course, this will make
it so that the output here of the single head will be 16 dimensional, because that is the head size.
So you can think of x as kind of like private information to this token, if you if you think
about it that way. So x is kind of private to this token. So I'm a fifth token at some and I
have some identity. And my information is kept in vector x. And now, for the purposes of the single
head, here's what I'm interested in. Here's what I have. And if you find me interesting, here's what
I will communicate to you. And that's stored in V. And so V is the thing that gets aggregated for
the purposes of this single head between the different notes. And that's basically the self
attention mechanism. This is this is what it does. There are a few notes that I would make like to
make about attention. Number one, attention is a communication mechanism. You can really think
about it as a communication mechanism, where you have a number of nodes in a directed graph,
where basically you have edges pointed between those like this. And what happens is every node
has some vector of information. And it gets to aggregate information via a weighted sum from
all the nodes that point to it. And this is done in a data dependent manner. So depending on whatever
data is actually stored at each node at any point in time. Now, our graph doesn't look like this.
Our graph has a different structure. We have eight nodes, because the block size is eight, and there's
always eight tokens. And the first node is only pointed to by itself. The second node is pointed
to by the first node and itself, all the way up to the eighth node, which is pointed to by all the
previous nodes and itself. And so that's the structure that our directed graph has or happens
happens to have an autoregressive sort of scenario like language modeling. But in principle,
attention can be applied to any arbitrary directed graph. And it's just a communication mechanism
between the nodes. The second note is that note is that there's no notion of space. So attention
simply acts over like a set of vectors in this graph. And so by default, these nodes have no idea
where they are positioned in the space. And that's why we need to encode them positionally and sort
of give them some information that is anchors to a specific position so that they sort of know
where they are. And this is different than, for example, from convolution, because if you run,
for example, a convolution operation over some input, there is a very specific sort of layout
of the information in space and the convolutional filters sort of act in space. And so it's not
like an attention. In attention is just a set of vectors out there in space, they communicate.
And if you want them to have a notion of space, you need to specifically add it,
which is what we've done when we calculated the relative, the positional encode encodings and
added that information to the vectors. The next thing that I hope is very clear is that the elements
across the batch dimension, which are independent examples, never talk to each other, they're always
processed independently. And this is a batched matrix multiply that applies basically a matrix
multiplication kind of in parallel across the batch dimension. So maybe it would be more accurate
to say that in this analogy of a directed graph, we really have, because the batch size is four,
we really have four separate pools of eight nodes. And those eight nodes only talk to each other.
But in total, there's like 32 nodes that are being processed. But there's sort of four separate
pools of eight, you can look at it that way. The next note is that here in the case of language
modeling, we have this specific structure of directed graph where the future tokens will
not communicate to the past tokens. But this doesn't necessarily have to be the constraint
in the general case. And in fact, in many cases, you may want to have all of the nodes talk to each
other fully. So as an example, if you're doing sentiment analysis or something like that with
a transformer, you might have a number of tokens, and you may want to have them all talk to each
other fully. Because later you are predicting, for example, the sentiment of the sentence. And so
it's okay for these nodes to talk to each other. And so in those cases, you will use an encoder
block of self attention. And all it means that it's an encoder block is that you will delete
this line of code, allowing all the nodes to completely talk to each other. What we're implementing
here is sometimes called a decoder block. And it's called a decoder, because it is sort of like
decoding language. And it's got this autoregressive format, where you have to mask with the triangle
and matrix so that nodes from the future never talk to the past, because they would give away
the answer. And so basically, in encoder blocks, you would delete this, allow all the nodes to talk.
In decoder blocks, this will always be present so that you have this triangular structure.
But both are allowed and attention doesn't care. Attention supports arbitrary connectivity
between nodes. The next thing I wanted to comment on is you keep me you keep hearing me say attention,
self attention, etc. There's actually also something called cross attention. What is the difference?
So basically, the reason this attention is self attention is because the keys, queries,
and the values are all coming from the same source from x. So the same source x produces keys,
queries, and values. So these nodes are self attending. But in principle, attention is much
more general than that. So for example, in encoder decoder transformers, you can have a case where
the queries are produced from x. But the keys and the values come from a whole separate external
source. And sometimes from encoder blocks that encode some context that we'd like to condition on.
And so the keys and the values will actually come from a whole separate source. Those are
nodes on the side. And here we're just producing queries. And we're reading off information from
the side. So cross attention is used when there's a separate source of nodes, we'd like to pull
information from into our notes. And it's self attention. If we just have nodes that would
like to look at each other and talk to each other. So this attention here happens to be self attention.
But in principle, attention is a lot more general. Okay, and the last note at this stage is
if we come to the attention is all you need paper here, we've already implemented attention. So given
query key and value, we've multiplied the query and the key, we've soft maxed it. And then we are
aggregating the values. There's one more thing that we're missing here, which is the dividing by one
over square root of the head size, the decay here is the head size. Why are they doing this one is
this important. So they call it a scaled attention. And it's kind of like an important normalization
to basically have the problem is if you have unit Gaussian inputs, so zero mean unit variance,
k and q are unit Gaussian. And if you just do way naively, then you see that your way actually
will be the variance will be on the order of head size, which in our case is 16. But if you
multiply by one over head size square root, so this is square root, and this is one over,
then the variance of way will be one, so we'll be preserved. Now why is this important? You'll
notice that way here will feed into softmax. And so it's really important, especially at initialization,
that way be fairly diffuse. So in our case here, we sort of locked out here and way
had a fairly diffuse numbers here. So like this. Now the problem is that because of softmax,
if weight takes on very positive and very negative numbers inside it, softmax will actually converge
towards one hot vectors. And so I can illustrate that here. Say we are applying softmax to a
tensor of values that are very close to zero, then we're gonna get a diffuse thing out of softmax.
But the moment I take the exact same thing and I start sharpening it, making it bigger,
by multiplying these numbers by eight, for example, you'll see that the softmax will start to sharpen.
And in fact, it will sharpen towards the max. So it will sharpen towards whatever number here
is the highest. And so basically, we don't want these values to be too extreme, especially at
initialization. Otherwise, softmax will be way too peaky. And you're basically aggregating
information from like a single node. Every node just aggregates information from a single other
node. That's not what we want, especially at initialization. And so the scaling is used just
to control the variance at initialization. Okay, so having said all that, let's now take our
self attention knowledge and let's take it for a spin. So here in the code, I created this head
module and implements a single head of self attention. So you give it a head size. And then
here it creates the key query and the value linear layers. Typically people learn these biases and
these. So those are the linear projections that we're going to apply to all of our nodes. Now here,
I'm creating this trill variable. Trill is not a parameter of the module. So in sort of pytorch
naming conventions, this is called a buffer. It's not a parameter. And you have to call it,
you have to assign it to the module using a register buffer. So that creates the trill,
the trying lower triangular matrix. And when we're given the input x, this should look very
familiar. Now we calculate the keys, the queries, we can only calculate the attention scores inside
way. We normalize it. So we're using scaled attention here. Then we made sure that sure
doesn't communicate with the past. So this makes it a decoder block. And then softmax and then
aggregate the value and output. Then here in the language model, I'm creating a head in the
constructor. And I'm calling itself attention head. And the head size I'm going to keep as the same
and embed just for now. And then here, once we've encoded the information with the token
embeddings and the position embeddings, we're simply going to feed it into the self attention
head. And then the output of that is going to go into the decoder language modeling head
and create the logits. So this is sort of the simplest way to plug in a self attention component
into our network right now. I had to make one more change, which is that here in the generate,
we have to make sure that our IDX that we feed into the model, because now we're using positional
embeddings, we can never have more than block size coming in. Because if IDX is more than block size,
then our position embedding table is going to run out of scope because it only has embeddings for
up to block size. And so therefore I added some code here to crop the context that we're going to
feed into self. So that we never pass in more than block size elements. So those are the changes.
And let's now train the network. Okay, so I also came up to the script here and I decreased the
learning rate because the self attention can't tolerate very, very high learning rates. And then
I also increased number of iterations because the learning rate is lower. And then I trained it and
previously we were only able to get to up to 2.5. And now we are down to 2.4. So we definitely see
a little bit of improvement from 2.5 to 2.4 roughly. But the text is still not amazing. So clearly the
self attention head is doing some useful communication. But we still have a long way to go. Okay, so
now we've implemented the scale.product attention. Now next up, and the attention is all you need
to paper, there's something called multi head attention. And what is multi head attention?
It's just applying multiple attentions in parallel and concatenating the results. So they have a
little bit of diagram here. I don't know if this is super clear. It's really just multiple attentions
in parallel. So let's implement that fairly straightforward. If we want a multi head attention,
then we want multiple heads of self attention running in parallel. So in PyTorch, we can do this by
simply creating multiple heads. So however many heads you want, and then what is the head size of each.
And then we run all of them in parallel into a list and simply concatenate all of the
outputs. And we're concatenating over the channel dimension. So the way this looks now is we don't
have just a single attention that has a head size of 32. Because remember an embed is 32.
Instead of having one communication channel, we now have four communication channels in parallel.
And each one of these communication channels typically will be smaller correspondingly. So
because we have four communication channels, we want eight dimensional self attention. And so
from each communication channel, we're going to gather eight dimensional vectors. And then we have
four of them. And that concatenates to give us 32, which is the original and embed. And so this is
kind of similar to if you're familiar with convolutions, this is kind of like a group convolution.
Because basically, instead of having one large convolution, we do convolution groups. And that's
multi headed self attention. And so then here we just use SA heads, self attention heads instead.
Now I actually ran it. And scrolling down. I ran the same thing. And then we now get this down to
2.28 roughly. And the output is still the generation is still not amazing. But clearly the validation
loss is improving because we were at 2.4 just now. And so it helps to have multiple communication
channels because obviously, these tokens have a lot to talk about. They want to find the constants,
the vowels, they want to find the vowels just from certain positions. They want to find
they want to find any kinds of different things. And so it helps to create multiple independent
channels of communication, gather lots of different types of data, and then decode the output.
Now going back to the paper for a second, of course, I didn't explain this figure in full
detail, but we are starting to see some components of what we've already implemented. We have the
positional encodings, the token encodings that add, we have the masked multi headed attention
implemented. Now, here's another multi headed attention, which is a cross attention to an
encoder, which we haven't, we're not going to implement in this case. I'm going to come back
to that later. But I want you to notice that there's a feet forward part here. And then this is
grouped into a block that gets repeated to get in again. Now the feet forward part here is just a
simple multi layer perceptron. So the multi headed. So here position wise feet forward networks is
just a simple little MLP. So I want to start basically in a similar fashion, also adding computation
into the network. And this computation is on the per node level. So I've already implemented it.
And you can see the diff highlighted on the left here when I've added or changed things. Now before
we had the self multi headed self attention that did the communication, but we went way too fast
to calculate the logits. So the tokens looked at each other, but didn't really have a lot of time
to think on what they found from the other tokens. And so what I've implemented here is a little
feet forward single layer. And this little layer is just a linear filed by a relevant on linearity.
And that's that's it. So it's just a little layer. And then I call it feet forward. And embed. And
then this feet forward is just called sequentially right after the self attention. So we self attend,
then we feed forward. And you'll notice that the feet forward here when it's applying linear, this
is on the per token level, all the tokens do this independently. So the self attention is the
communication. And then once they gathered all the data, now they need to think on that data
individually. And so that's what feet forward is doing. And that's why I've added it here. Now when
I train this, the validation laws actually continues to go down now to 2.24, which is down
from 2.28. The output still looked kind of terrible. But at least we've improved the situation. And so
as a preview, we're going to now start to interspers the communication with the computation. And that's
also what the transformer does when it has blocks that communicate and then compute, and it groups
them and replicates them. Okay, so let me show you what we'd like to do. We'd like to do something
like this, we have a block. And this block is basically this part here, except for the cross
attention. Now the block basically intersperses communication and the computation, the computation,
the communication is done using multi headed self attention. And then the computation is done using
a feet forward network on all the tokens independently. Now, what I've added here also is
you'll notice, this takes the number of embeddings in the embedding dimension and number of heads that
we would like, which is kind of like group sizing group convolution. And I'm saying that number of
heads we like is four. And so because this is 32, we calculate that because this 32, the number of
heads should be four, the head size should be eight, so that everything sort of works out channel
wise. So this is how the transformer structures sort of the sizes typically. So the head size will
become eight, and then this is how we want to interspers them. And then here, I'm trying to create
blocks, which is just a sequential application of block block block. So that we're interspersing,
communication, feet forward many, many times. And then finally, we decode. Now, actually try to run
this. And the problem is this doesn't actually give a very good answer. And very good result. And
the reason for that is we're starting to actually get like a pretty deep neural net. And deep neural
nets suffer from optimization issues. And I think that's what we're kind of like slightly starting
to run into. So we need one more idea that we can borrow from the transformer paper to resolve
those difficulties. Now there are two optimizations that dramatically help with the depth of these
networks and make sure that the networks remain optimizable. Let's talk about the first one.
The first one in this diagram is you see this arrow here. And then this arrow and this arrow,
those are skip connections, or sometimes called residual connections. They come from this paper,
the Procedural Learning Form and Recognition from about 2015, that introduced the concept. Now,
these are basically what it means is you transform the data, but then you have a skip connection
with addition from the previous features. Now the way I like to visualize it, that I prefer,
is the following. Here the computation happens from the top to bottom. And basically, you have this
residual pathway. And you are free to fork off from the residual pathway, perform some computation,
and then project back to the residual pathway via addition. And so you go from the inputs to the
targets only via plus and plus and plus. And the reason this is useful is because during bad
propagation, remember from our micrograd video earlier, addition distributes gradients equally
to both of its branches that that fed as the input. And so the supervision or the gradients from the
loss basically hop through every addition node all the way to the input, and then also fork off
into the residual blocks. But basically, you have this gradient superhighway that goes directly
from the supervision all the way to the input unimpeded. And then these original blocks are
usually initialized in the beginning. So they contribute very, very little, if anything, to the
residual pathway. They are initialized that way. So in the beginning, they are almost kind of like
not there. But then during the optimization, they come online over time. And they start to contribute.
But at least at the initialization, you can go from directly supervision to the input gradient
is unimpeded and just flows. And then the blocks over time kick in. And so that dramatically helps
with the optimization. So let's implement this. So coming back to our block here, basically what we
want to do is we want to do x equals x plus self attention and x equals x plus self that feed forward.
So this is x. And then we fork off and do some communication and come back. And we fork off and
we do some computation and come back. So those are residual connections. And then swinging back up
here, we also have to introduce this projection. So nn.linear. And this is going to be from
after we concatenate this, this is the size and embed. So this is the output of the self tension
itself. But then we actually want the to apply the projection. And that's the result. So the
projection is just a linear transformation of the outcome of this layer. So that's the projection
back into the residual pathway. And then here in a feed forward, it's going to be the same thing.
I could have a self that projection here as well. But let me just simplify it. And let me
couple it inside the same sequential container. And so this is the projection layer going back
into the residual pathway. And so that's, well, that's it. So now we can train this. So I implemented
one more small change. When you look into the paper again, you see that the dimensionality of input
and output is 512 for them. And they're saying that the inner layer here in the feed forward has
dimensionality of 2048. So there's a multiplier of four. And so the inner layer of the feed forward
network should be multiplied by four in terms of channel sizes. So I came here and I multiplied
four times embed here for the feed forward. And then from four times and embed coming back down
to an embed when we go back to the project to the projection. So adding a bit of computation here
and growing that layer that is in the residual block on the side of the residual pathway.
And then I trained this and we actually get down all the way to 2.08 validation loss.
And we also see that the network is starting to get big enough that our train loss is getting
ahead of validation loss. So we started to see like a little bit of overfitting. And our
generations here are still not amazing. But at least you see that we can see like is here this now
grief sync like this starts to almost look like English. So yeah, we're starting to really get
there. Okay. And the second innovation that is very helpful for optimizing very deep neural networks
is right here. So we have this addition now that's the residual part. But this norm is
referring to something called layer norm. So layer norm is implemented in PyTorch. It's a paper that
came out a while back here. And layer norm is very, very similar to bash norm. So remember back to
our Make More series part three, we implemented bash normalization. And bash normalization basically
just made sure that across the bash dimension, any individual neuron had unit Gaussian distribution.
So it was zero mean and unit standard deviation, one standard deviation output. So what I did here
is I'm copy pasting the bash norm one d that we developed in our Make More series. And see here,
we can initialize, for example, this module, and we can have a batch of 32 100 dimensional vectors
feeding through the bash norm layer. So what this does is it guarantees that when we look at just the
zero column, it's a zero mean one standard deviation. So it's normalizing every single
column of this input. Now the rows are not going to be normalized by default, because we're just
normalizing columns. So let's not implement layer norm. It's very complicated. Look, we come here,
we change this from zero to one. So we don't normalize the columns, we normalize the rows.
And now we've implemented layer norm. So now the columns are not going to be normalized.
But the rows are going to be normalized for every individual example, it's 100 dimensional vector is
normalized in this way. And because our computation now does not span across examples, we can delete
all of this buffer stuff, because we can always apply this operation, and don't need to maintain
any running buffers. So we don't need the buffers. We don't, there's no distinction between training
and test time. And we don't need these running buffers, we do keep gamma and beta, we don't need
the momentum, we don't care if it's training or not. And this is now a layer norm. And it normalizes
the rows instead of the columns. And this here is identical to basically this here. So let's now
implement layer norm in our transformer. Before I incorporate the layer norm, I just wanted to note
that, as I said, very few details about the transformer have changed in the last five years.
But this is actually something that slightly departs from the original paper. You see that the
add and norm is applied after the transformation. But in now it is a bit more basically common to
apply the layer norm before the transformation. So there's a reshuffling of the layer norms.
So this is called the pre norm formulation, and that the one that we're going to implement as well.
So select deviation from the original paper. Basically, we need to layer norms layer norm one
is an end dot layer norm. And we tell it how many words the embedding dimension. And we need the
second layer norm. And then here, the layer norms are applied immediately on x. So self dot
layer norm one applied on x and self dot layer norm two applied on x before it goes into self
attention and feed forward. And the size of the layer norm here is an embed so 32. So when the
layer norm is normalizing our features, it is the normalization here happens, the mean and the
variance are taken over 32 numbers. So the batch and the time act as batch dimensions, both of them.
So this is kind of like a per token transformation that just normalizes the features and makes them
a unit mean unit Gaussian at initialization. But of course, because these layer norms inside it
have these gamma and beta trainable parameters, the layer normal eventually create outputs that
might not be unit Gaussian, but the optimization will determine that. So for now, this is the
this is incorporating the layer norms and let's train them up. Okay, so I let it run. And we see
that we get down to 2.06, which is better than the previous 2.08. So a slight improvement by adding
the layer norms. And I'd expect that they help even more if we had bigger and deeper network.
One more thing I forgot to add is that there should be a layer norm here also typically,
as at the end of the transformer and right before the final linear layer that decodes into
vocabulary. So I added that as well. So at this stage, we actually have a pretty complete transformer
coming to the original paper. And it's a decoder only transformer. I'll talk about that in a second.
But at this stage, the major pieces are in place. So we can try to scale this up and see how well
we can push this number. Now, in order to scale out the model, I had to perform some cosmetic
changes here to make it nicer. So I introduced this variable called n layer, which just specifies
how many layers of the blocks we're going to have. I create a bunch of blocks and we have a new
variable number of heads as well. I pulled out the layer norm here. And so this is identical.
Now, one thing that I did briefly change is I added dropout. So dropout is something that you can add
right before the residual connection back, right before the connection back into the residual
pathway. So we can drop out that as the last layer here. We can drop out
here at the end of the multiheaded decision as well. And we can also drop out here when we
calculate the basically affinities and after the softmax, we can drop out some of those so we can
randomly prevent some of the notes from communicating. And so dropout comes from this paper from
2014 or so. And basically it takes your neural net and it randomly every forward backward pass
shuts off some subset of neurons. So randomly drops them to zero and trains without them.
And what this does effectively is because the mask of what's being dropped out is changed every
single forward backward pass, it ends up kind of training an ensemble of subnetworks. And then at
test time, everything is fully enabled and kind of all of those subnetworks are merged into a
single ensemble if you can, if you want to think about it that way. So I would read the paper to
get the full detail. For now, we're just going to stay on the level of this is a regularization
technique. And I added it because I'm about to scale up the model quite a bit. And I was concerned
about overfitting. So now when we scroll up to the top, we'll see that I changed a number of
hyper parameters here about our neural net. So I made the batch size be much larger. Now 64.
I changed the block size to be 256. So previously it was just eight, eight characters of context.
Now it is 256 characters of context to predict the 257th. I brought down the learning rate a little
bit because the neural net is now much bigger. So I brought down the learning rate. The embedding
dimension is now 384. And there are six heads. So 384 divide six means that every head is 64
dimensional as it as a standard. And then there are going to be six layers of that. And the dropout
will be a point two. So every forward backward pass 20% of all of these intermediate calculations
are disabled and dropped to zero. And then I already trained this and I ran it. So drumroll,
how does it perform? So let me just scroll up here. We get a validation loss of 1.48,
which is actually quite a bit of an improvement on what we had before, which I think was 2.07.
So we went from 2.07 all the way down to 1.48 just by scaling up this neural net with the code
that we have. And this of course ran for a lot longer. This maybe trained for, I want to say,
about 15 minutes on my A100 GPU. So that's a pretty good GPU. And if you don't have a GPU,
you're not going to be able to reproduce this. On a CPU, this would be, I would not run this on a
CPU or MacBook or something like that. You'll have to break down the number of layers and the
embedding dimension and so on. But in about 15 minutes, we can get this kind of a result. And
I'm printing some of the Shakespeare here, but what I did also is I printed 10,000 characters,
so a lot more, and I wrote them to a file. And so here we see some of the outputs.
So it's a lot more recognizable as the input text file. So the input text file just for reference
looked like this. So there's always someone speaking in this matter. And our predictions now
take on that form. Except of course, they're non-surgical when you actually read them. So
it is, every crimpty B house, oh, those prepation, we give heed.
Oh, ho, sent me you mighty lord. Anyway, so you can read through this. It's non-surgical, of course,
but this is just a transformer trained on the character level for one million characters
that come from Shakespeare. So they're sort of like blabbers on in Shakespeare-like manner,
but it doesn't, of course, make sense at this scale. But I think still a pretty good demonstration
of what's possible. So now I think that kind of like concludes the programming section of this
video. We basically kind of did a pretty good job in implementing this transformer, but the picture
doesn't exactly match up to what we've done. So what's going on with all these digital parts here?
So let me finish explaining this architecture and why it looks so funky. Basically, what's
happening here is what we implemented here is a decoder only transformer. So there's no component
here. This part is called the encoder, and there's no cross attention block here. Our block only has
a self attention and the feed forward. So it is missing this third in between piece here.
This piece does cross attention. So we don't have it and we don't have the encoder. We just have the
decoder. And the reason we have a decoder only is because we are just generating text and it's
unconditioned on anything. We're just we're just blabbering on according to a given data set.
What makes it a decoder is that we are using the triangular mask in our transformer. So it has this
autoregressive property where we can just go and sample from it. So the fact that it's using the
triangulate triangular mask to mask out the attention makes it a decoder. And it can be used
for language modeling. Now, the reason that the original paper had an encoder decoder architecture
is because it is a machine translation paper. So it is concerned with a different setting in particular.
It expects some tokens that encode, say for example, French. And then it is expected to decode
the translation in English. So you typically these here are special tokens. So you are expected to
read in this and condition on it. And then you start off the generation with a special token
called start. So this is a special new token that you introduce and always place in the beginning.
And then the network is expected to output neural networks are awesome. And then a special end token
to finish the generation. So this part here will be decoded exactly as we have done it.
Neural networks are awesome will be identical to what we did. But unlike what we did, they want to
condition the generation on some additional information. And in that case, this additional
information is the French sentence that they should be translating. So what they do now
is they bring the encoder. Now the encoder reads this part here. So we're only going to take the
part of French. And we're going to create tokens from it exactly as we've seen in our video. And
we're going to put a transformer on it. But there's going to be no triangular mask. And so all the
tokens are allowed to talk to each other as much as they want. And they're just encoding whatever's
the content of this French sentence. Once they've encoded it, they basically come out in the top
here. And then what happens here is in our decoder, which does the language modeling, there's an
additional connection here to the outputs of the encoder. And that is brought in through
cross attention. So the queries are still generated from X. But now the keys and the values are coming
from the side, the keys and the values are coming from the top generated by the nodes that came
outside of the decode the encoder. And those tops, the keys and the values there, the top of it,
feed in on a side into every single block of the decoder. And so that's why there's an additional
cross attention. And really what it's doing is it's conditioning the decoding, not just on the past
of this current decoding, but also on having seen the full fully encoded French prompt sort of.
And so it's an encoder decoder model, which is why we have those two transformers,
an additional block, and so on. So we did not do this because we have no, we have nothing to encode,
there's no conditioning, we just have a text file, and we just want to imitate it. And that's why
we are using a decoder only transformer, exactly as done in GPT. Okay, so now I wanted to do a very
brief walkthrough of nano GPT, which you can find in my GitHub. And then GPT is basically two files
of interest. There's train.py and model.py. train.py is all the boilerplate code for training the
network. It is basically all the stuff that we had here is the training loop. It's just that it's
a lot more complicated because we're saving and loading checkpoints and pre trained weights. And
we are decaying the learning rate and compiling the model and using distributed training across
multiple nodes or GPUs. So the train.py gets a little bit more hairy, complicated. There's more
options, etc. But the model.py should look very, very similar to what we've done here. In fact,
the model is almost identical. So first, here we have the causal self attention block. And all of
this should look very, very recognizable to you. We're producing query skis values. We're doing
dot products. We're masking applying softmax optionally dropping out. And here we are pooling
the way the values. What is different here is that in our code, I have separated out the multi headed
attention into just a single individual head. And then here I have multiple heads and I explicitly
concatenate them. Whereas here, all of it is implemented in a batched manner inside a single
causal self attention. And so we don't just have a B and a T and a C dimension, we also end up with
a fourth dimension, which is the heads. And so it just gets a lot more sort of hairy because we have
four dimensional array, tensors now, but it is equivalent mathematically. So the exact same
thing is happening is what we have. It's just a bit more efficient because all the heads are
not treated as a batch dimension as well. Then we have the multi layer perceptron, it's using the
galon non linearity, which is defined here, except instead of really, and this is done just because
openly I used it and I want to be able to load their checkpoints. The blocks of the transformer
are identical to communicate and the compute phase as we saw. And then the GPT will be identical,
we have the positioning coatings, token encodings, the blocks, the layer norm at the end, the final
linear layer. And this should look all very recognizable. And there's a bit more here,
because I'm loading checkpoints and stuff like that. I'm separating out the parameters into
those that should be weight decayed and those that shouldn't. But the generate function should
also be very, very similar. So a few details are different, but you should definitely be able to
look at this file and be able to understand a lot of the pieces now. So let's now bring things back
to chat GPT. What would it look like if we wanted to train chat GPT ourselves? And how does it relate
to what we learned today? Well, to train in chat GPT, there are roughly two stages. First is the
pre-training stage and then the fine-tuning stage. In the pre-training stage, we are training on a
large chunk of internet and just trying to get a first decoder only transformer to babble text.
So it's very, very similar to what we've done ourselves, except we've done like a tiny little
baby pre-training step. And so in our case, this is how you print a number of parameters. I printed
it and it's about 10 million. So this transformer that I created here to create little Shakespeare
transformer was about 10 million parameters. Our dataset is roughly one million characters,
so roughly one million tokens. But you have to remember that OpenAI uses different vocabulary.
They're not on the character level. They use these subword chunks of words. And so they have a
vocabulary of 50,000 roughly elements. And so their sequences are a bit more condensed. So our dataset,
the Shakespeare dataset, would be probably around 300,000 tokens in the OpenAI vocabulary, roughly.
So we trained about 10 million parameter model and roughly 300,000 tokens. Now, when you go to the
GPT3 paper and you look at the transformers that they trained, they trained a number of transformers
of different sizes. But the biggest transformer here has 175 billion parameters. So ours is again
10 million. They used this number of layers in the transformer. This is the N embed. This is the
number of heads. And this is the head size. And then this is the batch size. So ours was 65.
And the learning rate is similar. Now, when they train this transformer, they trained on 300 billion
tokens. So again, remember, ours is about 300,000. So this is about a million fold increase. And this
number would not be even that large by today's standards. You'd be going up one trillion and
above. So they are training a significantly larger model on a good chunk of the internet.
And that is the pre-training stage. But otherwise, these hyperparameters should be fairly recognizable
to you. And the architecture is actually nearly identical to what we implemented ourselves.
But of course, it's a massive infrastructure challenge to train this. You're talking about
typically thousands of GPUs having to talk to each other to train models of this size.
So that's just the pre-training stage. Now, after you complete the pre-training stage,
you don't get something that responds to your questions with answers and it's not helpful and
et cetera. You get a document completer. But it doesn't babble Shakespeare, it babbles internet.
It will create arbitrary news articles and documents and it will try to complete documents
because that's what it's trained for. It's trying to complete the sequence. So when you give it a
question, it would potentially just give you more questions. It would follow with more questions.
It will do whatever it looks like some close document would do in the training data on the
internet. And so who knows, you're getting kind of like undefined behavior. It might basically
answer with two questions with other questions. It might ignore your question. It might just try
to complete some news article. It's totally undermined, as we say. So the second fine-tuning
stage is to actually align it to be an assistant. And this is the second stage. And so this chat
gpt block post from opening I talks a little bit about how this stage is achieved. We basically
there's roughly three steps to this stage. So what they do here is they start to collect
training data that looks specifically like what an assistant would do. So they are documents that
have the format where the question is on top and then an answer is below. And they have a large
number of these, but probably not on the order of the internet. This is probably on the order of
maybe thousands of examples. And so they then fine-tune the model to basically only focus on
documents that look like that. And so you're starting to slowly align it. So it's going to
expect a question at the top and it's going to expect to complete the answer. And these very,
very large models are very sample efficient during their fine-tuning. So this actually somehow works.
But that's just step one. That's just fine-tuning. So then they actually have more steps where,
okay, the second step is you let the model respond and then different raters look at the
different responses and rank them for their preference as to which one is better than the other.
They use that to train a reward model. So they can predict basically using a different network,
how much of any candidate response would be desirable. And then once they have a reward model,
they run PPO, which is a form of policy gradient reinforcement learning optimizer,
to fine-tune this sampling policy so that the answers that the chatGPT now generates are expected
to score a high reward according to the reward model. And so basically there's a whole aligning
stage here or fine-tuning stage. It's got multiple steps in between there as well. And it takes the
model from being a document completer to a question answerer. And that's like a whole separate
stage. A lot of this data is not available publicly. It is internal to OpenAI and it's much harder to
replicate this stage. And so that's roughly what would give you a chatGPT. And nanoGPT
focuses on the pre-training stage. Okay, and that's everything that I wanted to cover today.
So we trained, to summarize, a decoder-only transformer following this famous paper,
Attention is All You Need from 2017. And so that's basically a GPT. We trained it on
Tiny Shakespeare and got sensible results. All of the training code is roughly 200 lines of code.
I will be releasing this code base. So also it comes with all the Git log commits along the way
as we built it up. In addition to this code, I'm going to release the notebook, of course,
the Google collab. And I hope that gave you a sense for how you can train these models like,
say, GPT3. That will be architecturally basically identical to what we have. But they are somewhere
between 10,000 and 1 million times bigger, depending on how you count. And so that's all I have for now.
We did not talk about any of the fine-tuning stages that would typically go on top of this.
So if you're interested in something that's not just language modeling, but you actually want to,
you know, say perform tasks, or you want them to be aligned in a specific way, or you want
to detect sentiment or anything like that, basically, any time you don't want something
that's just a document completer, you have to complete further stages of fine-tuning,
which we did not cover. And that could be simple, supervised fine-tuning, or it can be something
more fancy, like we see in chat GPT, where you actually train a reward model and then do rounds
of PPO to align it with respect to the reward model. So there's a lot more that can be done on top
of it. I think for now we're starting to get to about two hours mark. So I'm going to kind of
finish here. I hope you enjoyed the lecture. And yeah, go forth and transform. See you later.